Rebecca WrightFebruary 25, 2021LIS 4220Dataset Profile(redo) Dataset: https://www.hudexchange.info/resource/5948/2019-ahar-part-1-pit-estimates-of-homelessness-in-the-us/Title: "2007-2019 Point-in-Time Estimates by State." Excel file.Point in Time estimates are counts, done once a year (or every other year), of the homeless population in a given area. According to the Colorado Coalition for the Homeless, "PIT counts are required to be conducted at least biennially by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as a condition of applying for HUD homeless assistance funds. PIT counts are important because they provide data to quantify the scope of homelessness and help national, state, and local policymakers track progress towards the goal of ending homelessness" (CCH, "Snapshot of Homelessness"). The survey counts both sheltered and unsheltered homeless individuals, and is conducted according to a methodology guide published by HUD, in an attempt to ensure a consistent count across the country. Each region's process (typically a city or county) is coordinated by a Regional PIT coordinator, and the count of unsheltered individuals in particular requires the coordination of a number of organizations and volunteers to ensure that as many people as possible are counted (but also that each person is only counted once). The collected data is forwarded to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, which uses it to create The Annual Homeless Assessment Report (AHAR), which is submitted to Congress. While the ultimate stakeholders of this data are the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the US Congress, its impact on the local city/county organizations that collect this data cannot be underestimated. The staffing required to conduct the PIT counts are not insignificant (particularly in large cities like Los Angeles or New York City), and even the part of the count that covers the sheltered population requires coordination and communication with every homeless shelter in a given area. The guide that HUD publishes governing the methodology of the count is 76 pages long. And while this report is required in order for a community to receive federal housing assistance funds, I imagine that the data is useful beyond just that one destination. Homeless assistance programs search for funding in a variety of places, and the statistics that describe the level of need in the community--how many people are homeless, how full are shelters, is there a critical shortage of beds for a certain population, etc--are always useful when applying for funds, whether you're applying for a grant from a nonprofit organization or asking your city council for a budget increase. This particular dataset is only one file, but it is large: Each year (from 2007-2019) has its own tab. Within each tab, each state (and US territory) is a row, and the columns are for demographic variables. There are dozens of possible demographics, such as sheltered individuals, unsheltered individuals, sheltered families, unsheltered families, youth, chronically homeless individuals, veterans, etc. The dataset was freely available on the HUD Exchange website with no posted usage restrictions (which makes sense, since data gathered under the auspices of the federal government is generally made available to the public). The file is an Excel spreadsheet, so it requires a Microsoft license, or some other program that can open .xlsx files. The data does not come with much accomopanying metadata. There is a tab in the table for "revisions," to inform a user of when a dataset that was previously published has had to be revised. The list includes a brief outline of what was changed (e.g., "PIT estimate of veterans experiencing homelessness in shelter projects…was updated for the year 2013… This update did not change the total number of people experiencing homelessness in shelter projects [or overall] in the CoC—just the number of those people who were classified as veterans"). If applicable, it also directs the user to the site or report where they may find more information on the alteration. Other than the notes, the dataset does not specify when the data was last edited, or when a given year's data was completed. The HUD website includes dates for the release of the final report. I mostly found additional information about the PIT count method and process on the websites of local homeless assistance providers. The Metro Denver Homeless Initiative and the Colorado Coalition for the Homeless, for example, publish reports about the annual PIT counts, including methodology and the philosophy behind the count. But the HUD Exchange site where the files are posted don't say anything about rights or authorship, or who may use the data. The local organizations don't seem to publish their raw data, either, just the reports that the data are based on, though I suppose a researcher could request it if they wanted both local and federal raw data.The HUD Exchange site has access to both its annual reports and various data files in the same section of its site, which is helpful (https://www.hudexchange.info/homelessness-assistance/ahar/#2019-reports). I had to google for the methodology guide (which is apparently housed in the "Resource Library" on the website, along with over 8,000 other documents), so it would be nice if that was more accessible with the rest of the data. It would also be helpful to have the acronyms in the variables in the dataset explained or clarified in the file itself--there are categories like "Sheltered TH Homeless," "Sheltered SH," "Sheltered ES," "Children Parenting Youth," and it's not immediately apparent what any of those categories are (I found the answer in an MDHI report: "ES" is Emergency Shelter, "TH" is Transitional Housing," and I think "SH" is "Safe Haven,"...but then the report doesn't clarify what a Safe Haven bed is). It's clear that this data is primarily intended to be used by people who work or live in this sector, and who may already have familiarity with certain standards and vocabulary.As previously stated, this data is used by both federal and local organizations to generate reports and potentially to allocate funding. The largest of these is probably HUD's AHAR document which is submitted to Congress. I searched DU Library's catalog for "AHAR report" and immediately found the report itself listed in the Government Documents collection. There was also a 2005 article in a Federal Register regarding whether data from HUD and the GSE (Government Sponsored Enterprises) is proprietary or non-proprietary. I also searched for "point-in-time count" and found several articles about the potential undercounting of homeless youth, as well as a journal article on the reliability and effectiveness (or lack thereof) of the PIT count (Schneider 2016).Metro Denver Homeless Initiative. "2019 Point in TimeCity and County of Denver." https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/mdhi/pages/231/attachments/original/1566335912/Denver_Complete_V2.pdf?1566335912Colorado Coalition for the Homeless. "A Snapshot of Homelessness in the Colorado Balance of State Continuum of Care2019 Homeless Point-in-Time Study Sheltered and Unsheltered Count." https://www.coloradocoalition.org/sites/default/files/2019-06/2019%20CO%20BOS%20CoC%20PIT%20Final%20Report.pdf Schneider, M., Brisson, D., & Burnes, D. (2016). Do We Really Know how Many Are Homeless?: An Analysis of the Point-In-Time Homelessness Count. Families in Society, 97(4), 321–329. https://doi.org/10.1606/1044-3894.2016.97.39