Rebecca Wright
February 18, 2021
LIS 4220
Repository Profile


Repository: Harvard Dataverse, https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/harvard

I chose to look through the "Statistics and Econometrics" subheading in re3data for 
repositories, since my data set is a PIT (Point in Time) study of sheltered and unsheltered 
people in Colorado (as estimated by a count done on a specific date). Because analyses of how 
to "deal with" the homeless problem are often economic in nature (how many people are there, 
how much would it cost to house them, how much does it cost to give them medical attention, 
how much does it cost to clean up an encampment, etc), it seemed like a reasonable place to 
start.
       
As I was searching databases under this subject heading, I found the Henry A. Murray 
Research Archive, a data repository operated by the Institute for Quantitative Social Science 
(IQSS) at Harvard University. This repository is in turn part of a much larger Harvard 
"dataverse," a repository which is "open to all researchers from any discipline, both inside and 
outside of the Harvard community, where you can share, archive, cite, access, and explore 
research data." I couldn't tell if the Murray Archive was open to researchers who did work 
outside if the IQSS (most of the datasets I saw were specific to Massachusetts), but the broader 
Harvard dataverse is open to anyone. I think it would be an excellent place for my dataset. 
       
The Harvard Dataverse describes itself both as a resource (datasets can be made 
available to the general public, at a researcher's discretion), as a tool to researchers, to help 
them organize their datasets and metadata; and to academic journals who want to facilitate the 
visibility of data associated with published articles. The "Getting Started" documentation on the 
website states that, "the Dataverse collection can be for an individual researcher, research 
group, an entire department, a journal, etc." The repository organizes its datasets by subject: 
agricultural sciences, arts and humanities, earth and environmental sciences, engineering, and 
others. There are fourteen possible subject headings.

It appears that opening an account to deposit data is open to basically anybody. You can 
create an account with a username and email, your Google account, using an institutional login 
(for example, Harvard has something called "HarvardKey," which I imagine is similar to DU's 
PioneerWeb login credentials) or a GitHub account. When you upload a dataset, you are also 
required to add metadata--at a bare minimum, a title, the author(s), and a description. 
Anybody can search the Harvard Dataverse, and if a dataset has been made public by the 
researchers who uploaded it, it can be downloaded without logging in or creating an account. 
Files can be uploaded in several formats, but I think it's up to the researchers to decide if they 
want to upload in multiple formats or just one. 

The repository has a fairly in-depth (if not always easy to navigate) User Guide, as well 
as a "Support" button, which brings up a form that you can use to email the staff behind the 
dataverse. They have a document of "Best Practices," including topics such as how any data 
pulled from this repository should be cited in any report or study in which it appears; maintaining 
the anonymity of human subjects; and the types of waivers/permissions the dataverse can offer 
users. There's even a Style Guide. 

Additionally, there's a Google Groups users community where people can post questions 
that they have or network with other researchers. I went to see the Group and it is active, with 2-
3 posts per day, and replies from Dataverse staff and admins. All in all, it appears to be a 
repository that is interested in not just housing data, but also in building up a community and a 
set of norms around sharing and citing data.

The dataverse does support specific metadata formats. In the user guide, I found this 
list: Dublin Core, DDI (Data Documentation Initiative Codebook 2.5), DDI HTML Codebook (A 
more human-readable, HTML version of the DDI Codebook 2.5 metadata export), DataCite 4, 
JSON (native Dataverse format), OAI_ORE, OpenAIRE, Schema.org, and JSON-LD. 
Acceptable formats for the datasets themselves are SPSS (POR and SAV formats), STATA, R, 
Excel XLSX (XLS is NOT supported), and CSV.

When downloading datasets, the files are delivered via a .zip folder that preserves any 
folder structure the original owner of the dataset had set up. Users can also choose to download 
only one file at a time. The default format is a tab-separated-value file, but users can also 
choose to download the files in the original format (with the caution that there may be 
proprietary software that's required to be able to access it). There is also a metadata file, and 
may be an RData file. The website itself is powered by OpenScholar, which is also a Harvard 
project, built specifically for Òshowcasing research.Ó

